The States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, to
all whom it may concern, do by these Presents send greeting:

As it is apparent to all that a prince is constituted by God to be
ruler of a people, to defend them from oppression and violence as the
shepherd his sheep; and whereas God did not create the people slaves
to their prince, to obey his commands, whether right or wrong, but
rather the prince for the sake of the subjects (without which he could
be no prince), to govern them according to equity, to love and support
them as a father his children or a shepherd his flock, and even at the
hazard of life to defend and preserve them. And when he does not
behave thus, but, on the contrary, oppresses them, seeking
opportunities to infringe their ancient customs and privileges,
exacting from them slavish compliance, then he is no longer a prince,
but a tyrant, and the subjects are to consider him in no other
view. And particularly when this is done deliberately, unauthorized by
the states, they may not only disallow his authority, but legally
proceed to the choice of another prince for their defense. This is the
only method left for subjects whose humble petitions and remonstrances
could never soften their prince or dissuade him from his tyrannical
proceedings; and this is what the law of nature dictates for the
defense of liberty, which we ought to transmit to posterity, even at
the hazard of our lives. And this we have seen done frequently in
several countries upon the like occasion, whereof there are notorious
instances, and more justifiable in our land, which has been always
governed according to their ancient privileges, which are expressed in
the oath taken by the prince at his admission to the government; for
most of the Provinces receive their prince upon certain conditions,
which he swears to maintain, which, if the prince violates, he is no
longer sovereign.

Now thus it was that the king of Spain after the demise of the
emperor, his father, Charles the Fifth, of the glorious memory (of
whom he received all these provinces), forgetting the services done by
the subjects of these countries, both to his father and himself, by
whose valor he got so glorious and memorable victories over his
enemies that his name and power became famous and dreaded over all the
world, forgetting also the advice of his said imperial majesty, made
to him before to the contrary, did rather hearken to the counsel of
those Spaniards about him, who had conceived a secret hatred to this
land and to its liberty, because they could not enjoy posts of honor
and high employments here under the states as in Naples, Sicily, Milan
and the Indies, and other countries under the king's dominion. Thus
allured by the riches of the said provinces, wherewith many of them
were well acquainted, the said counselors, we say, or the principal of
them, frequently remonstrated to the king that it was more for his
Majesty's reputation and grandeur to subdue the Low Countries a second
time, and to make himself absolute (by which they mean to tyrannize at
pleasure), than to govern according to the restrictions he had
accepted, and at his admission sworn to observe. From that time
forward the king of Spain, following these evil counselors, sought by
all means possible to reduce this country (stripping them of their
ancient privileges) to slavery, under the government of Spaniards
having first, under the mask of religion, endeavored to settle new
bishops in the largest and principal cities, endowing and
incorporating them with the richest abbeys, assigning to each bishop
nine canons to assist him as counselors, three whereof should
superintend the inquisition.

By this incorporation the said bishops (who might be strangers as well
as natives) would have had the first place and vote in the assembly of
the states, and always the prince's creatures at devotion; and by the
addition of the said canons he would have introduced the Spanish
inquisition, which has been always as dreadful and detested in these
provinces as the worst of slavery, as is well known, in so much that
his imperial majesty, having once before proposed it to these states,
and upon whose remonstrances did desist, and entirely gave it up,
hereby giving proof of the great affection he had for his
subjects. But, notwithstanding the many remonstrances made to the king
both by the provinces and particular towns, in writing as well as by
some principal lords by word of mouth; and, namely, by the Baron of
Montigny and Earl of Egmont, who with the approbation of the Duchess
of Parma, then governess of the Low Countries, by the advice of the
council of state were sent several times to Spain upon this
affair. And, although the king had by fair words given them grounds to
hope that their request should be complied with, yet by his letters he
ordered the contrary, soon after expressly commanding, upon pain of
his displeasure, to admit the new bishops immediately, and put them in
possession of their bishoprics and incorporated abbeys, to hold the
court of the inquisition in the places where it had been before, to
obey and follow the decrees and ordinances of the Council of Trent,
which in many articles are destructive of the privileges of the
country.

This being come to the knowledge of the people gave just occasion to
great uneasiness and clamor among them, and lessened that good
affection they had always borne toward the king and his
predecessors. And, especially, seeing that he did not only seek to
tyrannize over their persons and estates, but also over their
consciences, for which they believed themselves accountable to God
only. Upon this occasion the chief of the nobility in compassion to
the poor people, in the year 1566, exhibited a certain remonstrance in
form of a petition, humbly praying, in order to appease them and
prevent public disturbances, that it would please his majesty (by
showing that clemency due from a good prince to his people) to soften
the said points, and especially with regard to the rigorous
inquisition, and capital punishments for matters of religion. And to
inform the king of this affair in a more solemn manner, and to
represent to him how necessary it was for the peace and prosperity of
the public to remove the aforesaid innovations, and moderate the
severity of his declarations published concerning divine worship, the
Marquis de Berghen, and the aforesaid Baron of Montigny had been sent,
at the request of the said lady regent, council of state, and of the
states-general as ambassadors to Spain, where the king, instead of
giving them audience, and redress the grievances they had complained
of (which for want of a timely remedy did always appear in their evil
consequences among the common people), did, by the advice of Spanish
council, declare all those who were concerned in preparing the said
remonstrance to be rebels, and guilty of high treason, and to be
punished with death, and confiscation of their estates; and, what is
more (thinking himself well assured of reducing these countries under
absolute tyranny by the army of the Duke of Alva), did soon after
imprison and put to death the said lords the ambassadors, and
confiscated their estates, contrary to the law of nations, which has
been always religiously observed even among the most tyrannic and
barbarous princes.

And, although the said disturbances, which in the year 1566 happened
on the aforementioned occasion, were now appeased by the governess and
her ministers, and many friends to liberty were either banished or
subdued, in so much that the king had not any show of reason to use
arms and violence, and further oppress this country, yet for these
causes and reasons, long time before sought by the council of Spain
(as appears by intercepted letters from the Spanish ambassador, Alana,
then in France, writ to the Duchess of Parma), to annul all the
privileges of this country, and govern it tyrannically at pleasure as
in the Indies; and in their new conquests he has, at the instigation
of the council of Spain, showing the little regard he had for his
people, so contrary to the duty which a good prince owes to his
subjects), sent the Duke of Alva with a powerful army to oppress this
land, who for his inhuman cruelties is looked upon as one of its
greatest enemies, accompanied with counselors too like himself. And,
although he came in without the least opposition, and was received by
the poor subjects with all marks of honor and clemency, which the king
had often hypocritically promised in his letters, and that himself
intended to come in person to give orders to their general
satisfaction, having since the departure of the Duke of Alva equipped
a fleet to carry him from Spain, and another in Zealand to come to
meet him at the great expense of the country, the better to deceive
his subjects, and allure them into the toils, nevertheless the said
duke, immediately after his arrival (though a stranger, and no way
related to the royal family), declared that he had a captain-general's
commission, and soon after that of governor of these provinces,
contrary to all its ancient customs and privileges; and, the more to
manifest his designs, he immediately garrisoned the principal towns
and castles, and caused fortresses and citadels to be built in the
great cities to awe them into subjection, and very courteously sent
for the chief nobility in the king's name, under pretense of taking
their advice, and to employ them in the service of their country. And
those who believed his letters were seized and carried out of Brabant,
contrary to law, where they were imprisoned and prosecuted as
criminals before him who had no right, nor could be a competent judge;
and at last he, without hearing their defense at large, sentenced them
to death, which was publicly and ignominiously executed.

The others, better acquainted with Spanish hypocrisy, residing in
foreign countries, were declared outlawed, and had their estates
confiscated, so that the poor subjects could make no use of their
fortresses nor be assisted by their princes in defense of their
liberty against the violence of the pope; besides a great number of
other gentlemen and substantial citizens, some of whom were executed,
and others banished that their estates might be confiscated, plaguing
the other honest inhabitants, not only by the injuries done to their
wives, children and estates by the Spanish soldiers lodged in their
houses, as likewise by diverse contributions, which they were forced
to pay toward building citadels and new fortifications of towns even
to their own ruin, besides the taxes of the hundredth, twentieth, and
tenth penny, to pay both the foreign and those raised in the country,
to be employed against their fellow-citizens and against those who at
the hazard of their lives defended their liberties. In order to
impoverish the subjects, and to incapacitate them to hinder his
design, and that he might with more ease execute the instructions
received in Spain, to treat these countries as new conquests, he began
to alter the course of justice after the Spanish mode, directly
contrary to our privileges; and, imagining at last he had nothing more
to fear, he endeavored by main force to settle a tax called the tenth
penny on merchandise and manufacture, to the total ruin of these
countries, the prosperity of which depends upon a flourishing trade,
notwithstanding frequent remonstrances, not by a single province only,
but by all of them united, which he had effected, had it not been for
the Prince of Orange with diverse gentlemen and other inhabitants, who
had followed this prince in his exile, most of whom were in his pay,
and banished by the Duke of Alva with others who between him and the
states of all the provinces, on the contrary sought, by all possible
promises made to the colonels already at his devotion, to gain the
German troops, who were then garrisoned in the principal fortresses
and the cities, that by their assistance he might master them, as he
had gained many of them already, and held them attached to his
interest in order, by their assistance, to force those who would not
join with him in making war against the Prince of Orange, and the
provinces of Holland and Zealand, more cruel and bloody than any war
before. But, as no disguises can long conceal our intentions, this
project was discovered before it could be executed; and he, unable to
perform his promises, and instead of that peace so much boasted of at
his arrival a new war kindled, not yet extinguished.

All these considerations give us more than sufficient reason to
renounce the King of Spain, and seek some other powerful and more
gracious prince to take us under his protection; and, more especially,
as these countries have been for these twenty years abandoned to
disturbance and oppression by their king, during which time the
inhabitants were not treated as subjects, but enemies, enslaved
forcibly by their own governors.

Having also, after the decease of Don Juan, sufficiently declared by
the Baron de Selles that he would not allow the pacification of Ghent,
the which Don Juan had in his majesty's name sworn to maintain, but
daily proposing new terms of agreement less
advantageous. Notwithstanding these discouragements we used all
possible means, by petitions in writing, and the good offices of the
greatest princes in Christendom, to be reconciled to our king, having
lastly maintained for a long time our deputies at the Congress of
Cologne, hoping that the intercession of his imperial majesty and of
the electors would procure an honorable and lasting peace, and some
degree of liberty, particularly relating to religion (which chiefly
concerns God and our own consciences), at last we found by experience
that nothing would be obtained of the king by prayers and treaties,
which latter he made use of to divide and weaken the provinces, that
he might the easier execute his plan rigorously, by subduing them one
by one, which afterwards plainly appeared by certain proclamations and
proscriptions published by the king's orders, by virtue of which we
and all officers of the United Provinces with all our friends are
declared rebels and as such to have forfeited our lives and
estates. Thus, by rendering us odious to all, he might interrupt our
commerce, likewise reducing us to despair, offering a great sum to any
that would assassinate the Prince of Orange.

So, having no hope of reconciliation, and finding no other remedy, we
have, agreeable to the law of nature in our own defense, and for
maintaining the rights, privileges, and liberties of our countrymen,
wives, and children, and latest posterity from being enslaved by the
Spaniards, been constrained to renounce allegiance to the King of
Spain, and pursue such methods as appear to us most likely to secure
our ancient liberties and privileges. Know all men by these presents
that being reduced to the last extremity, as above mentioned, we have
unanimously and deliberately declared, and do by these presents
declare, that the King of Spain has forfeited, ipso jure, all
hereditary right to the sovereignty of those countries, and are
determined from henceforward not to acknowledge his sovereignty or
jurisdiction, nor any act of his relating to the domains of the Low
Countries, nor make use of his name as prince, nor suffer others to do
it. In consequence whereof we also declare all officers, judges,
lords, gentlemen, vassals, and all other the inhabitants of this
country of what condition or quality soever, to be henceforth
discharged from all oaths and obligations whatsoever made to the King
of Spain as sovereign of those countries. And whereas, upon the
motives already mentioned, the greater part of the United Provinces
have, by common consent of their members, submitted to the government
and sovereignty of the illustrious Prince and Duke of Anjou, upon
certain conditions stipulated with his highness, and whereas the most
serene Archduke Matthias has resigned the government of these
countries with our approbation, we command and order all justiciaries,
officers, and all whom it may concern, not to make use of the name,
titles, great or privy seal of the King of Spain from henceforward;
but in lieu of them, as long as his highness the Duke of Anjou is
absent upon urgent affairs relating to the welfare of these countries,
having so agreed with his highness or otherwise, they shall
provisionally use the name and title of the President and Council of
the Province.

And, until such a president and counselors shall be nominated,
assembled, and act in that capacity, they shall act in our name,
except that in Holland and Zealand where they shall use the name of
the Prince of Orange, and of the states of the said provinces until
the aforesaid council shall legally sit, and then shall conform to the
directions of that council agreeable to the contract made with his
highness. And, instead of the king's seal aforesaid, they shall make
use of our great seal, center-seal, and signet, in affairs relating to
the public, according as the said council shall from time to time be
authorized. And in affairs concerning the administration of justice,
and transactions peculiar to each province, the provincial council and
other councils of that country shall use respectively the name, title,
and seal of the said province, where the case is to be tried, and no
other, on pain of having all letters, documents, and despatches
annulled. And, for the better and effectual performance hereof, we
have ordered and commanded, and do hereby order and command, that all
the seals of the King of Spain which are in these United Provinces
shall immediately, upon the publication of these presents, be
delivered to the estate of each province respectively, or to such
persons as by the said estates shall be authorized and appointed, upon
peril of discretionary punishment.

Moreover, we order and command that from henceforth no money coined
shall be stamped with the name, title, or arms of the King of Spain in
any of these United Provinces, but that all new gold and silver
pieces, with their halfs and quarters, shall only bear such
impressions as the states shall direct. We order likewise and command
the president and other lords of the privy council, and all other
chancellors, presidents, accountants-general, and to others in all the
chambers of accounts respectively in these said countries, and
likewise to all other judges and officers, as we hold them discharged
from henceforth of their oath made to the King of Spain, pursuant to
the tenor of their commission, that they shall take a new oath to the
states of that country on whose jurisdiction they depend, or to
commissaries appointed by them, to be true to us against the King of
Spain and all his adherents, according to the formula of words
prepared by the states-general for that purpose. And we shall give to
the said counselors, justiciaries, and officers employed in these
provinces, who have contracted in our name with his highness the Duke
of Anjou, an act to continue them in their respective offices, instead
of new commissions, a clause annulling the former provisionally until
the arrival of his highness. Moreover, to all such counselors,
accomptants, justiciaries, and officers in these Provinces, who have
not contracted with his highness, aforesaid, we shall grant new
commissions under our hands and seals, unless any of the said officers
are accused and convicted of having acted under their former
commissions against the liberties and privileges of this country or of
other the like maladministration.

We farther command of the president and members of the privy council,
chancellor of the Duchy of Brabant, also the chancellor of the Duchy
of Guelders, and county of Zutphen, to the president and members of
the council of Holland, to the receivers of great officers of
Beoostersheldt and Bewestersheldt in Zealand, to the president and
council of Friese, and to the Escoulet of Mechelen, to the president
and members of the council of Utrecht, and to all other justiciaries
and officers whom it may concern, to the lieutenants all and every of
them, to cause this our ordinance to be published and proclaimed
throughout their respective jurisdictions, in the usual places
appointed for that purpose, that none may plead ignorance. And to
cause our said ordinance to be observed inviolably, punishing the
offenders impartially and without delay; for so it is found expedient
for the public good. And, for better maintaining all and every article
hereof, we give to all and every one of you, by express command, full
power and authority. In witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands
and seals, dated in our assembly at the Hague, the six and twentieth
day of July, 1581, indorsed by the orders of the states-general, and
signed J. De Asseliers.


Source:

  From: Oliver J. Thatcher, ed., The Library of Original Sources
  (Milwaukee: University Research Extension Co., 1907), Vol. V: 9th to
  16th Centuries, pp. 189-197.
